Term-level metadata - first draft #19 (#20)
TIBHannover/terminology-metadata: MetadataGuide.md

Regardless of how many languages an ontolgy supports, the labels should always be explicitly language-tagged - even if the ontology only provides data in only one language!
The label should be the preferred label of an entity.
<!-- check with labeling conventions in OBO https://obofoundry.org/principles/fp-012-naming-conventions.html -->
There should only be one preferred label per entity and language.

Recommended property: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#label>

Example (text/turtle):

```Turtle
<https://www.purl.org/SomeOntologyClass> rdf:type owl:Class ;
    rdfs:label "smart grid"@en .
```

Alternative properties:

* <http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#prefLabel>
* <http://purl.org/dc/terms/title>
* <http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/title>
* <http://schema.org/name>
* <https://d-nb.info/standards/elementset/gnd#preferredNameForTheSubjectHeading>
* <https://physh.org/rdf/2018/01/01/core#prefLabel>

SHACL validation rules:

* `sh:minCount 1`
* `sh:datatype rdf:langString`
* `sh:uniqueLang true`

You can discuss this recommendation with us at <>.

#### 4.1.2 Definition

<!-- todo see also: https://obofoundry.org/principles/fp-006-textual-definitions.html -->

> Each ontology term should have a short description defining it.

Author: ```suggestion
Each ontology term must have a short description defining it.
```

A typical definition usually consists of two parts:
a reference to a super-ordinate term and a statement naming its defining characteristics.
The characteristics usually serve to distinguish the term from related terms.
The definiton should explicitly be language-tagged even if the ontology only serves data in one language!

> There may only be one definition per term and language.

Author: ```suggestion
There must only be one definition per term and language.
```

* `sh:xone ( [sh:datatype rdf:langString ;] [sh:nodeKind sh:IRI ;])`
* `sh:in ( <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000103> <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000226> <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000228> <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000229> <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000227> <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/OMO_0001000>)`

You can discuss this recommendation with us at <>.

##### 4.1.3.3 Term replacement

In some cases there may be a replacement term that can be used instead of an obsoleted term.
The deprecated term should point to this replacement.

Recommended property: [term replaced by (IAO:0100001)](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0100001)

Example (text/turtle):

```Turtle
<https://www.purl.org/SomeOntologyClass> rdf:type owl:CLass ;
    obo:IAO_0100001 <https://www.purl.org/SomeOtherOntologyClass>.
```

Alternative properties: n/a

SHACL validation rules:

* `sh:nodeKind sh:IRI`

You can discuss this recommendation with us at <>.

### 4.2 Recommended metadata

#### 4.2.1 Synonyms/ alternative labels

An ontology term may have more than just one label which it can be referred by.

> Since synonyms are an obstacle not only to understanding but also to the search for information, an ontology is a good place to collect frequent synonyms of a term.

Author: ```suggestion
Since synonyms are an obstacle not only to understanding but also to finding information, an ontology is a good place to collect frequent synonyms of a term.
```

Recommended property: <http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#altLabel>

Example (text/turtle):

```Turtle
<https://www.purl.org/SomeOntologyClass> rdf:type owl:Class ;
    skos:altLabel "intelligent grid"@en .
```

Alternative properties:

<!-- see also: https://git.tib.eu/terminology/terminology-system-config/-/blob/master/docs/ontology_metadata_overview.md?ref_type=heads#synonym_property -->
* <http://www.geneontology.org/formats/oboInOwl#hasExactSynonym>
* <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000118>
<!-- * <http://purl.org/ppeo/PPEO.owl#hasExactSynonym> -->
<!-- does not resolve! -->
<!-- * <http://purl.bioontology.org/ontology/npo#FULL_SYN>  -->
<!-- unparsable -->
<!-- * <http://www.ontologyrepository.com/CommonCoreOntologies/alternative_label> -->
<!-- 404 -->
<!-- * <https://www.omg.org/spec/Commons/AnnotationVocabulary/synonym> -->
<!-- * <http://www.ontology-of-units-of-measure.org/resource/om-2/alternativeLabel> -->
<!-- * <> -->
<!-- * <> -->
<!-- * <> -->
<!-- * <> -->

SHACL validation rules:

* `sh:datatype rdf:langString`

You can discuss this recommendation with us at <>.

### 4.3 Optional metadata

> #### 4.3.1 Term editor

Author: ```suggestion
#### 4.3.1 Term editor/ term contributor(s)
```
